# Meta-analysis of the Elwha River Water Temperature Regime
## Wai Chun (Jun) Chong, Malia Cortez, Taylor Nguyen, Anna Tsai
### Seattle University - Master of Science in Data Science 24.3

### Abstract
Our project aims to improve stream temperature monitoring, evaluation, and visualization in the Elwha River for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). NOAA is an agency within the U.S. Department of Commerce dedicated to the stewardship and management of marine resources. This includes the conservation and management of fishery resources, habitat protection, and the recovery of protected marine species such as whales, turtles, and salmon. Since 2010, NOAA and its partners have undertaken extensive research on the Elwha River in northwestern Washington state, specifically studying the impacts of the 2012 removal of two hydroelectric dams on key species like salmon. Despite collecting a wealth of data, significant gaps exist across various time periods, posing challenges to both accurate river study and effective communication with stakeholders, including the Lower Elwha Klallam Tribe. Our team has employed compressed sensing, a modeling method, to address stream temperature data gaps and enhance data completeness. Subsequently, we have visualized this data in a dashboard built in R Shiny. By modeling a more complete dataset and creating more accessible data visualizations our team has contributed to a more comprehensive understanding of the ecological impacts of dam removal on the Elwha River. Our approach has enabled NOAA to fill in missing historical data, improve future data collection efforts, and provide accessible data visualization tools for public study and engagement.

### Problem Statement
Over the past two decades, temperature monitoring efforts along the Elwha River, spanning more than 45 miles, have employed a combination of stationary loggers and manual data collection to capture hourly temperature readings. Researchers face the challenge of trekking to remote logger locations to retrieve data via USB or Bluetooth—a task made difficult by the river's extensive reach and the rugged terrain. The deployment of loggers has been limited by the practicalities of natural accessibility, water flow, and equipment limitations, leading to inconsistencies in data collection sites over the years. Additionally, the harsh environmental conditions and logistical challenges prevent year-long logger deployment, necessitating supplementary manual data collection to fill gaps and ensure a comprehensive temperature dataset.

### Solution Proposal
The discontinuity of the temporal data is an obstacle to understanding the temperature regime of the entire river due to the difference of available data. This increases the effort for data preprocessing, where scientists must aggregate data in different frequency, dealing with massive missing data, and might have to employ imputation techniques. This introduces uncertainty and complexity on environmental management and conservation efforts, as decisions rely on accurate interpretation of the data. Moreover, the predictive model might not catch the complete underlying patterns with those data gaps, leading to lower accuracy on forecast. 

Central to our endeavor is the objective of establishing a seamless and comprehensive historical dataset through the fusion of data from various proximal sensor sites. This allows the data to get a more complete historical narrative, effectively bridging the temporal and spatial gaps induced by shifts in sensor locations or the natural reformation of the river's course. This work could extend to the strategic evaluation and optimization of the current sensor network. This ensures each site is positioned to maximize data coverage and accuracy, reducing the manual efforts for data collection. 

Moreover, acknowledging the diverse community invested in the Elwha River's future—including fellow biologists, local residents, and enthusiasts eager to engage with the restoration project—our endeavor includes the creation of an interactive web-based dashboard. This dynamic platform coupled with the more completed historical data offers not only accurate decision-making but also fosters a spirit of collaboration and unity among all those connected to the Elwha River's conservation efforts. 

### Files
- RShiny
- add more files and information here...
